# Transportation-Networks-and-COVID19---Chicago

ABSTRACT

2020 has been a challenging year with a global pandemic that affected many aspects of our lives. This paper aims to study the impact of COVID19 on traffic crashes, taxi trips, and transportation network providers in the City of Chicago using various statistical and analytical techniques. Ride-share and taxi trips, and traffic crashes in 2019 and 2020 are being studied. The data is being analyzed to detect the impact of COVID19 on people in terms of traffic mobility and safety. Data visualization techniques and database processing for large-scale analytics are utilized to do comparisons, detect irregularities, and summarize conclusions. Interesting patterns were revealed regarding crashes, distance traveled, tipping behaviors, and number of trips, e.g. monthly hit and run, and nighttime crashes have increased during the pandemic while tipping behaviors have decreased. This research provides practical implications by proposing effective ways to better understand the effect of a pandemic on the transportation networks.

INTRODUCTION

During a global health crisis when the balance of the world has changed, it has become very important to study the sudden changes this pandemic has caused and its potential impact on our future. The travelling behaviors have been disrupted where cities such as Chicago, London, Los Angeles, New York, and San Francisco experienced a 37 to 50% drop in average vehicle miles traveled (VMT) compared to before the pandemic based on INRIX data (Stockdale 2020). In response to changes, Uber launched two pilot programs; Uber Direct and Uber Connect (Uber 2020). 
Transportation network companies and taxis temporarily adapted to a new business model for the duration of the pandemic and its aftermath, slowly returning to pre-COVID services (Shaheen 2020). Shaheen adds that although Lyft and Uber have temporarily stopped offering pooled rides during the pandemic, there is a possibility that demand for pooled rides will not recover if physical distancing becomes a cultural norm. In New York City, ridership plunged by 94% from the first week of March to the week of May 4. Afraid of contracting the virus (sadly, at least 50 drivers have died from the virus), roughly 83% of drivers stopped working altogether (Daus 2020). More importantly, the National Safety Council (2020) reports that fatal car crashes per mile driven increased by 14% in March and there was an 18.6% decrease in miles driven compared to the same time last year. 
Will these patterns reside and have a long-term future impacts on the transportation networks and road safety? In Chicago, should these rates be approached to answer vital questions about the future of transportation in the times of pandemics? This study aims to conduct different aspects to draw a clearer picture on different road behaviors. In addition, it provides practical instances on how the digital services industry is expanding to higher scales to cover different traditional industries. 

DATA SOURCE

Data was acquired from Chicago Data Portal to study the impact of COVID19 on transportation networks. Taxis and Transportation Network Providers (TNP) or usually referred as ride-share companies, which provide prearranged transportation services for compensation through Internet-enabled applications or digital platforms to connect passengers with drivers of vehicles for hire such as Uber, Lyft, or Via. More than 189 million records were collected from trips reported to the City of Chicago as part of routine reporting required by ordinance. Each record is represented with a unique ID and trip details (times, areas, coordinates, distance, and fare). Data covers all trips from Jan-1st 2019 to Sep-30th 2020 for TNP and to Oct-31st 2020 for taxis.	
Furthermore, crashes records were used to analyze road behaviors and detect changes. Data covers time from Jan-1st 2018 to Nov-26th 2020 (2.9 years), and includes crashing details (time, location, weather, speed, lightning, damage, coordinates, injuries, and road condition). For further analysis, hospitals data was retrieved from the Homeland Infrastructure Foundation-Level Data which addresses improvements of National geospatial information across multiple levels of government. Data contains locations of 7596 hospitals across 50 US states acquired from more than 100 state departments and federal sources.

METHODOLOGY

Database for large-scale analytics techniques were utilized to store, manage, and retrieve data for visualizations and analytical purposes. A local database schema was designed on SQLite to fit and reference data appropriately. Data pipelines were built in Python to populate data through multiple cleansing stages. 
Various queries were constructed to generate specific reports. In addition, multiple improvement steps were considered to enhance retrieval performances due to the large-scale and difficulties to join and aggregate data. Indexing, grid-querying, batching, grouping, and nested-selects were utilized to aggregate and extract results. For example, a new table was created to check and store trips to hospitals by measuring distance between each trip drop-off coordinates and 42 hospital locations in Chicago area. This will take more than 7.9 billion calculations. Moreover, another table was created to determine pickup and drop-off trips in Chicago O’Hare and Mid-way airports within a radius of 1200 and 600 meters, respectively, from appropriately centralized obtained points.
Visualization techniques were utilized in R to implement different graphs and plot multiple results. Data reconstruction and alignment tools were used to construct appropriate graphs in terms of size, measurements, colors, and labeling.

